Time to move on to CSS Grid.
So first of all, why CSS Grid?
Why would we ever want to use
that Flexbox team pretty good?
Why would we want to move
on to a grid based layout?
First of all, it is built in the CSS
specification just like Flexbox is so
it is totally a legit way of laying out
web pages unlike floats, unlike table
based layouts, and all of the other hacks
that we've used in the history of CSS.
The other interesting thing about grid
is that there's no row markup required.
In the past, we have written a lot of row
markup well as it pertains to Flexbox,
but now with grid,
we don't have to do that anymore
because we can specify our
layouts in two dimensions.
And as always, we're gonna have to mind
our parents and children to make sure that
we get the correct set of
properties on the parents and
the children appropriately.
Grid is designed to
work in two dimensions.
That means we have to think about not only
going across the page and just the next
row on top of each other, we have to think
about items that are going to span across
various rows or various columns on
the page, so we have to think about that.
The last point here I want to make is in
the first time I recorded this course,
and at that point in time, really in 2017.
We talked a lot about how we use Flex for
UI elements and use grid for major layout.
And that was pretty much the
recommendation that came from the what wig
people from MDN and so forth.
But I think after four years of people
working with Flexbox, and grid,
I think the better recommendation at
this point in time is to use Either
methodology where they
make the most sense.
So rather than trying to
dogmatically stick to grid for
major layout on webpages,
and then Flexbox for
the UI inside of various cells hat I'm
here to tell you is use what works where
it works best because there are strengths
and weaknesses to each of these.
And we're going to dig
into a lot of those today.
This is a screenshot of grid and
Flexbox explained right from the website.
As you see here with Flexbox,
we have a series of rows just like we have
seen all through this course
one right after the other.
And you can have different numbers
of boxes on each of those rows.
But it is still row after
row after row of boxes.
This is what I mean when I
say it's one dimensional.
All we think about are these various
rows or potentially the columns.
But realistically,
we don't necessarily use columns in
our layout processes that often.
With grid, we are truly thinking
about going across rows,
going across columns, which makes for
more interesting types of layouts.
If you're old enough to remember the table
based layout days where we dealt with row
spans and col spans,
we're back to that again, but
with legit, straight up CSS instead of
a hack in HTML the way we used to do it.
So, this is the major difference
between these two methodologies.
You need to think very carefully about how
you are going to work in two dimensions
when you're working with grid.
In terms of the browser support,
it's all there now.
And you don't need to
worry about that anymore.
So the level one specification, which
is CSS Grid, pretty much as maybe you
are somewhat familiar with it at this
point is supported by all major browsers.
And it's been supported by all
major browsers for some time now.
There is a new type of grid
layout called sub grid.
It's currently under development and
it's only supported by Firefox
at this moment in time.
For that reason I'm not going to
be talking about sub grid today.
There's a lot of excitement around sub
grid people are very interested in how
sub grid is going to change their lives.
We'll see, we'll see.
And, of course, the partial support or
no support is with our
usual browser suspects.
So any version of Internet Explorer,
older versions of Edge,
those are going to have
issues with support.
So pretty much par for the course.
All right, so let's talk a little bit
about the kinds of markup that we're going
to use with grid and then the types of
CSS, this is one of the things with grid.
Whereas Flexbox had just a few types
of Properties that we needed to
leverage to make a web page layout,
grid actually has several
different types of syntax, potentially
to do the same kind of thing and
you can pick one of those along the way
and decide what works best for you.
There are some advantages to using
one kind of syntax sometimes and
other syntaxes at other times.
But that is what I want
you to be aware of.
That's where a lot of the confusion
comes from, because there's so
many different ways to say
the same thing with grit.
So this is what your HTML might look like.
This is for the starting type of syntax
I'm going to lead you through first,
which is the line based placement and I'll
tell you what that means in just a moment.
So your HTML here looks similar
to what we had with Flexbox.
Before there is a parent or
a grid container,
there are children or the grid items.
And each one of those grid
items now has its own class.
Reason why is because we're gonna have to
spell out potentially where each one of
those grid cells is going to go
with this first type of syntax.
So we set up our CSS, very simply,
we tell the wrapper to display grid And
we can use the gap property here.
Now again, if some of you
have some background in grid,
we used to say grid hyphen gap that is no
longer a thing that has now been displaced
by the gap property and the gap property
works in both Flexbox and in grid.
So if we said just a gap of 10 pixels,
that's gonna put a gap horizontally and
vertically all the way around these
boxes at 10 pixels in this case.
With line based placement,
we have a series of lines in this
case we're working with columns.
Those lines also apply to rows.
They count like humans,
we start with one and
you start to the outside
of your first grid cell.
That becomes line number one.
After that first grid cell before
the second one That's line number two,
and so on across the screen.
So in that first cell there we've set
our grid column goes from one to two.
Our second cell goes from two to three.
Our third cell goes from three to four,
and
our last cell would go from Four to five.
So this is a shorthand here.
This is a start and an end.
You can spell these out with grid hyphen
column hyphen, start, grid hyphen,
column hyphen, end, or you can just
use the shorthand that I've used
here where we're indicating the start and
finish of both of those lines.
Then you can start thinking about
the two dimensional aspect of it.
What I showed you there before
was just a very simple row.
If you were laying this out in
a more complicated grid fashion,
then we're gonna think about what happens
if we have a cell that goes over several
rows are over several columns.
Then for example, here with column one,
that dot call hyphen one.
It starts at row line number one,
it skips over a line number two,
because that's part of that cell,
and it ends at line number three.
So we're going to say our grid hyphen
row has a value of one slash three,
that is how we go about specifying these.
So as you see with this type of syntax,
we're very, very specific
about where each cell is placed in
space using these types of numbers.
It's kinda absolutish,
where it's saying exactly where we want
each cell here inside of the grid.
There's nothing wrong with that.
If you are very particular about
where things are going to go, and
this code is not necessarily going
to be reused somewhere else.
And you don't have necessarily a bunch of,
maybe you have a bunch of
press releases or a bunch of images or
a bunch of some other type of content,
little chunks that you want
to display nicely on a page.
This type of syntax is going to be more
difficult to work with under those kinds
of conditions where you don't necessarily
know how many items you need inside of
a grid based layout.
Under those kinds of conditions, you
might work with Flexbox much more easily.
That's kind of what Flexbox
was designed to do.
Or there are some other grid syntaxes
that are a little bit more flexible In
terms of where you start and
where you end in this line based syntax,
we'll take a look at that as well.
So as I mentioned, this is the hard part
of grid, all these kinds of syntax, so.
The numbers we just talked about,
the lines actually have
their have these numbers.
There's a span notation we're
going to talk about momentarily.
You also have the option
of naming your lines.
So rather than just going by the numbers,
which to me is very simple and
straightforward.
You can in fact, name your lines.
If that is an easier approach for
you and then,
use those names inside of your syntax.
I'm not gonna cover that today, but
there's lots of places you can
look up what that syntax is.
You can also create names, grid,
template areas which we will
cover a little bit later on.
And then of course there's tons of
shorthand and longhand properties.
So this to me, again is one of
the most confusing parts of grid and
the best way to mitigate this is to
take a look at the CSS tricks page,
which is called
The Complete Guide to Grid,
and I've given that to you on
today's notes in the website.
And it will give you a link to that
particular page on CSS tricks where you
can look up all of that syntax.
That's probably the best
way to go with this.
There is another game for practicing your
grid syntax if you're interested in that,
for the same people who made Flexbox
Froggy, we had the CSS Grid garden.
It's a great game, I thoroughly encourage
you to go play it if you want to explore
all of the different ways of saying
the same thing inside of grid.
The other interesting part of
this is tracking your parents and
children, the containers and the items.
And so this moves through space so
we can have a single element
that starts as a grid item.
Okay, so somewhere out here,
we have a grid container.
We have this grid item.
It's also a grid container for
the next element inside of it.
That element could be a grid item and
a flex item, and
a flex container, and so forth.
So managing these parents and
children can get very complicated.
We're gonna look at an example
like this a little bit later on.
So as I said here, so grid container one
goes to grid item one, it also becomes
grid container number two, that might
become a grid item number two and
a flex container with a flex
item associated with it.
You can in fact stack these up
in all kinds of crazy ways.
So just sort of know that at this point
in time that this is possible and
by the end of today you'll
know how to do this.